Create partner guide for Consul and Zscaler (#17931)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/nia/usage/zscaler-application-segments.mdx

---
page_title: Automate Zscaler with Consul-Terraform-Sync 
description: Use Consul-Terraform-Sync (CTS) to automatically configure your Zscaler Private Access (ZPA) application segment's domain entries when your Consul service changes.
---

# Automate ZScaler Private Access application segments with CTS

This topic describes how to automatically configure your ZScaler Private Access (ZPA) application segments using Terraform and Consul.

## Overview

You can use Consul-Terraform-Sync (CTS) for network infrastructure automation (NIA). This enables you to automatically update your infrastructure and network devices using Terraform whenever your service networking control plane (Consul) changes.

The following image shows the basic architecture of an NIA setup with ZPA application segment.

![NIA CTS with ZPA application segments workflow](/img/nia/zpa-application-segments-diagram-workflow.png)

Complete the following steps to configure your ZPA application segment:

1. Register your Consul services
1. Configure CTS
1. Start CTS
1. Verify NIA workflow

## Background

> CTS is a tool that uses Consul's service catalog as a source of truth for all applications running in a given environment. When it detects changes to the services (for example, a new service node is added or deleted from the service list), CTS dynamically applies the necessary changes to your infrastructure using Terraform, in this case, the ZPA application segment resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CTS is an automation tool that uses Consul's service catalog as a source of truth for all applications running in a given environment. When it detects changes to the services (for example, a new service node is added or deleted from the service list), CTS dynamically applies the necessary changes to your infrastructure using Terraform, in this case, the ZPA application segment resources.
```

![NIA CTS with ZPA high-level workflow diagram](/img/nia/cts-zpa-workflow.png)

<Tip>

ZScaler also manages the [`application-server-nia`](https://registry.terraform.io/modules/zscaler/application-server-nia/zpa/latest) Terraform NIA module. This module will create and update application servers in ZPA when CTS detects changes in Consul services.

</Tip>

This topic assumes you are familiar with the standard Consul workflow and CTS. If you are unfamiliar with these topics, reference their respective tutorials to learn more.

- Complete the [Get Started with Consul on VMs](/consul/tutorials/get-started-vms) or [Get Started with Consul on Kubernetes](/consul/tutorials/get-started-kubernetes) tutorials to learn more about Consul.
- Complete the [Network Infrastructure Automation with Consul-Terraform-Sync Intro](/consul/tutorials/network-infrastructure-automation/consul-terraform-sync-intro) tutorial to learn more about CTS.

## Requirements

1. A Zscaler Private Access (ZPA) Tenant
1. ZPA API Credentials. You will use these credentials to authenticate both Terraform and CTS to create and manage resources in ZPA Cloud.

> 1. A [Consul datacenter](#consul) for service networking and service mesh

Reviewer: The instructions listed as well as the service configuration files seem to be Service Discovery only. 

This line could be misleading.

    port = 80
    check {
      id = "web"
      name = "web TCP check"
      tcp = "localhost:80"
      interval = "15s"
      timeout = "1s"
    }
  }
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  </Tab>
  <Tab heading="JSON" group="json">

  Create a service configuration file with the following details named `web.json`.

  <CodeBlockConfig filename="web.json">

  ```json
  {
  "service": {
    "name": "web",
    "id": "web",
    "tags": ["web"],
    "port": 80,
    "check": {
      "id": "web",
      "name": "web TCP check",
      "http": "localhost:80",
      "interval": "15s",
      "timeout": "1s"
    }
    }
  }
  ```

  </CodeBlockConfig>

  </Tab>
  </Tabs>

1. Once you have created the configuration file, register the service with Consul.

  <Tabs>
  <Tab heading="HCL" group="hcl">

  ```shell-session
  $ consul services register web.hcl
  ```

  </Tab>
  <Tab heading="JSON" group="json">

  ```shell-session
  $ consul services register web.json
  ```

  </Tab>
  </Tabs>

## Configure CTS

CTS requires access to the Consul catalog. If you're using Consul as a Terraform backend, you will also need privileges to store the Terraform state into Consul's key-value (KV) store.

> In production environments, we recommend enabling access control lists (ACLs) on Consul. In order for CTS to retrieve information from Consul, it must pass a token in its configuration. Refer to the [production CTS tutorial](/consul/tutorials/network-infrastructure-automation/consul-terraform-sync-secure) for more information about ACL tokens and an example of a secure CTS configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In production environments, we recommend enabling access control lists (ACLs) on Consul. With ACLs enabled, CTS must pass a token in its configuration to retrieve information from Consul. Refer to the [production CTS tutorial](/consul/tutorials/network-infrastructure-automation/consul-terraform-sync-secure) for more information about ACL tokens and an example of a secure CTS configuration.
```

The `terraform_provider` specifies the parameters to interact with the ZPA.

<Note title="Security Note">

   In a production environment, we recommend separating any sensitive credentials from the CTS configuration files and loading them dynamically using environment variables, Consul KV, or HashiCorp Vault. Refer to the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/zscaler/zpa/latest/docs#authentication) for a full set of provider arguments.

</Note>

<CodeBlockConfig filename="tasks.hcl" hideClipboard>

```hcl
terraform_provider "zpa" {
  zpa_client_id       = "{{ env \"ZPA_CLIENT_ID\" }}"
  zpa_client_secret   = "{{ env \"ZPA_CLIENT_SECRET\" }}"
  zpa_customer_id     = "{{ env \"ZPA_CUSTOMER_ID\" }}"
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

The `task` block defines a task for CTS to run when specific Consul services change.

- `name` defines the task name.
- `providers` defines the providers this task uses. In this case, the previously defined `zpa` provider.
- `module` defines the path to the ZPA Terraform NIA module. This module lets Terraform dynamically automatically create and update application segments when there are changes to specific Consul services.

> - `condition "services"` defines the Consul services, when changed, would trigger this CTS task. The names must match the name of the Consul service you want to trigger the task (in this case, `web`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `condition "services"` defines the Consul services that, when changed, would trigger this CTS task. The names must match the name of the Consul service you want to trigger the task (in this case, `web`).
```

<CodeBlockConfig filename="tasks.hcl" hideClipboard>

```hcl
task {
  name = "zpa_application_segment"
  description = "This task dynamically updates application segments domain names, tcp ports"
  providers = ["zpa"]
  module = "zscaler/application-segment-nia/zpa"
  condition "services" {
    names = ["web"]
  }
  variable_files = [""]
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

For more details about the configuration, refer to the [CTS configuration docs](/consul/docs/nia/configuration). For more details on the Terraform NIA module for ZPA application segments, refer to the [Terraform Registry documentation ](https://registry.terraform.io/modules/zscaler/application-segment-nia/zpa/latest) or [GitHub repository](https://github.com/zscaler/terraform-zpa-application-segment-nia).

## Start CTS

> Run the `consul-terraform-sync start` command to start CTS and perform the following operations:

Reviewer: From the statement it seems that the user needs to do the three steps.

Shall we make it  explicit that these steps are automatically performed by CTS at startup?

## ...

Apply complete! Resources: 0 added, 0 changed, 0 destroyed.
[INFO] (ctrl) task completed zpa_application_segment
[INFO] (ctrl) all tasks completed once
[INFO] (cli) running controller in daemon mode
[INFO] (api) starting server at '8558'
```

CTS continuously runs as a daemon and automatically executes the `zpa_application_segment` task when it detects changes to the `web` Consul service.

## Verify NIA automation workflow

Verify the workflow by registering new instances of the `web` service in Consul.

Create a service configuration file with the following details named `web2.hcl`. The only difference between this configuration and `web.hcl` is the service ID is set to `web2`.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="web2.hcl">

```hcl
service {
  name = "web"
  id = "web2"
  tags = ["web"]
  port = 80
  check {
    id = "web"
    name = "web TCP check"
    tcp = "localhost:80"
    interval = "15s"
    timeout = "1s"
  }
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Then, register the service with Consul.

```shell-session
$ consul services register web2.hcl
```

> Once CTS detects the new Consul service, it will automatically trigger the `zpa_application_segment` task, as defined in the configuration file. The task uses Terraform to update the ZPA application segment domain entries to include the new Consul service instances. Instead, if you de-registered the Consul service, CTS will trigger the ZPA application segment domain entries to remove the servers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once CTS detects the new Consul service, it will automatically trigger the `zpa_application_segment` task, as defined in the configuration file. The task uses Terraform to update the ZPA application segment domain entries to include the new Consul service instances. Instead, if you de-registered the Consul service, CTS will update the ZPA application segment domain entries to remove the servers. 
```

Reviewer: We used trigger above for the module itself. `update` here seems more correct.
